---
title: The Hidden Life of Stylesheet Preprocessing
---

{% raw %}
<div class="css-full-post-content js-full-post-content">
<br />Like any piece of art, a stylesheet should be indivisible and bold, but natural. It should arrive to the browser in one elegant file, a succinct connection between page semantics and presentation. Preprocessing distances a stylesheet from the Sturm und Drang of its development, and this distance is necessary for completion and refinement.<br /><br />Carpenters remove measurement marks from their finished works. Painters cover sketch lines. So should CSS authors remove their own scaffolding from stylesheets. Every "big green button" class, every "grid-column-2" are so many unseemly nicks and marks. Preprocessors such as Sass remove these artifacts through the concept of mixins.<br /><br />Mixins provide modular styles at authoring-time, but are preprocessed to hide the structure from the client. Consider a "Buy Now" button -- the HTML should reference only the meaning of the button, not its presentation.<br /><br />SCSS for the "Buy Now" button can refer to a notion of being big and green, but the notion will compile to pure style commands, and the HTML will reference only the class "purchase."<br /><pre><code class="css">button.purchase {<br />  @include big-green-button<br />}</code></pre>Along with mixin leitmotifs, Sass allows uniform substitutions with variables. These authoring variables (such as shared colors) are another part of the hidden life of preprocessed styles. Designers' intention of synchronizing certain color values across the web page is clearly expressed in Sass, but becomes reticent in the generated CSS, discernable by only repetition itself. The Sass fluidity is replaced with confidently inscrutable CSS commands.<br /><br />For network efficiency, CSS should be sent as a single file. However, in its secret Sass life it can be stored among several files according to the classification of its rules. Jonathan Snook has made a five-part classification: base, layout, module, state, and theme. He describes it in his <a href="http://smacss.com/">SMACSS</a> methodology.<br /><br />Beyond its promoting semantic HTML and separating concerns, Sass allows designers to write their intentions rather than implementations. Libraries like <a href="http://compass-style.org/">Compass</a> include mixins to simplify concepts like <a href="http://compass-style.org/reference/compass/typography/vertical_rhythm/">vertical rhythm</a>. Forget tinkering with element padding, just declare that an item is, for instance, a "leader" or a "trailer" and the library will add padding appropriate to the size and surroundings of the element.<br /><br />Finally, the hidden life of preprocessed CSS can include secret manuscript notes. Authors can add comments to their styles, noting the ways they can combine, and their variations. For instance a login form can have invalid fields and required fields. &nbsp;Kyle Neath believes that the best documentation is living documentation, and he created a library called <a href="https://github.com/kneath/kss">KSS</a> to bring Sass styles to life. KSS parses specially formatted Sass comments and demonstrate them in a styleguide. Using KSS you can see your styles in their hidden life, posing for the ways they will appear in production.
</div>
{% endraw %}
