---
title: Database migrations without merge conflicts
---

{% raw %}
<div class="css-full-post-content js-full-post-content">
Ever discover an open source project that makes you overjoyed? That moment when you feel like <i>somebody gets it</i>, and things are getting better? That's how I felt tonight:<br /><br /><div style="text-align: center;">[&nbsp;<a href="https://github.com/theory/sqitch">theory/sqitch</a>&nbsp;]</div><br />This is a database migration system built for the git era. It supports non-linear patch history and a system of detailed logging, reversion, and tagging. Oh, and it's built around test driven database design.<br /><br />Here's one ingenious property of the system. It has a special format for the so-called "plan file" it updates as you apply or revert migrations. People are free to work on multiple branches of a codebase and change the plan file willy nilly. You might be used to getting merge conflicts in your database schema, but the plan file format is designed to merge cleanly and automatically in git with the <a href="http://git-scm.com/docs/gitattributes#_built-in_merge_drivers">union merge strategy</a>. Just put&nbsp;<span style="font-family: Courier New, Courier, monospace;">sqitch.plan merge=union</span> into your <span style="font-family: Courier New, Courier, monospace;">.gitattributes</span> file and relax.<br /><br />Sqitch is under active development for "better integration with version control systems...to make managing idempotent reworkings even easier."<br /><br /><div style="text-align: center;">[&nbsp;<a href="https://github.com/theory/sqitch/blob/master/lib/sqitchtutorial.pod">try the tutorial</a>&nbsp;]</div><h3>Objections</h3><div><ul><li>"It's written in Perl, eww!" Yeah I don't write perl either, but the project is easy to install (even has a homebrew <a href="https://github.com/theory/homebrew-sqitch/">tap</a>) and you don't have to worry about it. That's like complaining about the fuel used in a hyperdimensional warp drive as you ride in your horse-drawn buggy.</li><li>"It wants me to write crusty stored procedures?" No, not at all. Write the SQL of your choice to match the architecture of your app.</li><li>"Is that an unsalted md5 password in the documentation example?" Don't worry, read the whole documentation. Some examples intentionally show the wrong ways of doing things in order to correct them later and demonstrate concepts.</li></ul></div><br /><script async class="speakerdeck-embed" data-id="ad105ed0ac490130d6a626f5cde8fd08" data-ratio="1.2994923857868" src="//speakerdeck.com/assets/embed.js"></script>
</div>
{% endraw %}
